.\" ***********************************************************************
.\" *  Copyright (C) 2005-2006 Rémi Denis-Courmont.                       *
.\" *  This program is free software; you can redistribute and/or modify  *
.\" *  it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published  *
.\" *  by the Free Software Foundation; version 2 of the license.         *
.\" *                                                                     *
.\" *  This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,    *
.\" *  but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of     *
.\" *  MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.               *
.\" *  See the GNU General Public License for more details.               *
.\" *                                                                     *
.\" *  You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License  *
.\" *  along with this program; if not, you can get it from:              *
.\" *  http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html                               *
.\" ***********************************************************************
.TH "TRACEROUTE6" "8" "$Date$" "traceroute6" "System Manager's Manual"
.SH NAME
traceroute6 \- IPv6 traceroute tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR "traceroute6" " [" "-AInrSU" "] [" "-f min_hop" "] [" "-m max_hop" "] ["
.BR "-q attempts" "] [" "-s source" "] [" "-w wait" "] <"
.BR "hostname/address" "> [" "port/packet length" "]"

.SH DESCRIPTON
.B traceroute6
is an IPv6 traceroute implementation.

It displays the list of hops along the network route between the local system
and specified destination, by sending packets while incrementing their hop
limit, until the final destination is reached.

By default, traceroute6 sends UDP probe packets toward the destination (that's
the historical default). However, it can also send TCP packets, much like
Michael C. Toren's tcptraceroute does on IPv4 networks.

You must specify the name or address of the host toward which the network
route should be determined. An optional additional parameter specifies either
the probe packets length (for UDP and ICMP packets), or the destination port
number (for TCP packets).

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B "\-A"
Send TCP/ACK probe packets. That's very efficient against stateless
firewalls (e.g. the official Linux kernel versions up to and including 2.4.31
and 2.6.14), and utterly helpless against stateful ones. Note that TCP/ACK
probing cannot determine whether the destination TCP port is open or not.

.TP
.B "\-F"
This option is ignored for backward compatibility.
IPv6 packets are never fragmented en route.

.TP
.B "\-f" "
Override the initial IPv6 packets hop limit (default: 1).

.TP
.B "\-h"
Display some help and exit.

.TP
.B "\-I"
Send ICMPv6 Echo requests (like ping6) as probe packets.

.TP
.B "\-m"
Override the maximum hop limit (maximum number of hops).
The default is 30 hops which should be sufficient on the IPv6 Internet for
some time.

.TP
.B "\-N"
Try to resolve each hop's IPv6 address to a host name. This is the default.
This option is meant for backward compatibility with tcptraceroute(8).

.TP
.B "\-n"
Do not try to resolve each hop's IPv6 address to a host name. That may speed
up the traceroute significantly.

.TP
.B "\-q"
Override the number of probes sent to each hop (default: 3).

.TP
.B "\-r"
Do not route packets, i.e. do not send packets through a gateway that would be
specified by the routing table. At the time of writing, Linux kernel 2.6.16
(latest stable release series) ignores this option.

.TP
.B "\-S"
Use TCP/SYN probe packets. That's the default for tcptraceroute6.

.TP
.B "\-s"
Specify the source address to use for probe packets explicitly.

.TP
.B "\-S"
Use UDP probe packets. That's the default for traceroute6.

.TP
.B "\-V"
Display program version and license and exit.

.TP
.B "\-w"
Override the delay (in seconds) to wait for response once a given probe packet
was sent (default: 5 seconds).

.TP
.B "\-x"
This option is ignored for backward compatibility.
The IPv6 header has no checksum field.

.SH SECURITY
.RI "traceroute6 should be " "setuid" " " "root" " to allow use by non "
privileged users. It will drop its root privileges before any attempt
is made to send or receive data from the network so as to reduce the possible
impact of a security vulnerability.

.SH BUGS
The packet length is currently not implemented for UDP and ICMP probe packets.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
ipv6(7), traceroute(8), tcptraceroute(8)

.SH AUTHOR
Rémi Denis-Courmont <rdenis at simphalempin.com>

$Id$

